Previously...
- Aah! Stop!
- Make me a better offer.
Let her go in safety,
and you can have me.
I know how we can save young Jamie.
Easy, lad.
Hyah!
If I don't set that hand,
he'll be crippled for life.
What happened in that room
between you and Randall?
He made love to me.
You did what was necessary to survive.
That's all.
It's time we made plans.
He'll have to flee the country.
Murtagh's gone to find
the boat for France.
Good-bye to you, Claire.
God bless.
How do you know what's going
to happen in Scotland?
Well, what can we do but play our part?
What if we could stop it from happening?
Change the future?
There's something else. I'm pregnant.
Ahh!
I wished I were dead.
And if I'd kept my eyes shut,
I could have almost touched
the edges of oblivion.
But I'd made a promise
and had to keep it.
Even if it meant living a
life I no longer wanted.
He was gone.
They were all gone.
The world I'd left only
moments ago was now dust.
You all right, ma'am?
Are you all right?
Ma'am?
Do you speak English?
What year is it?
The year?
What year is this?
Why, it's 1948.
Who won?
Who won the Battle of Culloden?
Do you not feel well?
Perhaps I could take you...
Tell me!
Tell me who won the Battle
of Culloden, tell me now!
The British! Cumberland and the British!
Would you let me go?
- sync and corrections by Caio -
- www.addic7ed.com -
_
Excuse me.
- Excuse me, nurse?
- Yes?
My name is Randall, Frank Randall.
I received a call from a Dr. Edwards?
Yes, sir.
One moment please, Mr. Randall.
Thank you.
He's here.
Ah, Mr. Randall.
I'm Dr. Edwards.
Where is she?
Oh, she's resting comfortably.
Some dehydration,
and superficial cuts and
bruises notwithstanding,
ah, she appears to be in good health.
Right.
Emotionally, she's, um...
well, she's better now, I should think.
We gave her a sedative last night,
and today she's much calmer.
Can you turn that bloody
thing off, please?
So noisy here.
Oh...
Claire?
Frank.
Hello.
I'm back.
And I am so grateful.
- Are you?
- Of course.
With all my heart.
I'm sorry... wh...
No.
It's not you.
- Mrs. Randall?
- Hey!
What are you doing? Get out of here!
Easy now, I'm just doing my job.
Now watch the camera!
Claire.
I've spoken with Reverend
Wakefield, and he's prepared
some rooms for us while you convalesce.
No one will bother us there.
Do you know if Mrs. Graham
is still in his employ?
Mrs. Graham?
Um, I didn't ask, but I would assume so.
I need to speak with her.
I'm going to need some clothes.
Has she said anything?
No, only pleasantries.
I've received an answer from
my friend, Professor Atkins.
Oh?
"Examined the clothing you sent,
"appears to be a marvelous example
"of authentic 18th century
Scottish woman's wardrobe.
"Incredibly valuable.
Where did you find?"
Oh, that's a good question.
What are you gonna tell him?
What can I tell him?
This is not the sort
of outfit she could've
just walked into a shop
and purchased, is it?
No.
No, sir.
It's puzzling, that.
Oh, she's nearly exhausted my collection
on Culloden and the Jacobite rebellion.
Why the sudden obsession
with Scottish history?
I have no idea.
She never showed much interest
when she was with...
before.
So many questions. She's
been back nearly a week.
Don't you think it's time
she gave you some answers?
I believe she will, when she's ready.
Well, my sermon is not
going to write itself.
You know, you're not the
only one with questions.
Hmm?
Devil take the press.
Hm. That's not likely.
Even the devil has standards.
There has to be a fuller account
of the Highlander losses somewhere.
Well, I must say, the Reverend has
the finest collection in Scotland.
Even the curator of Old
Leanach Cottage himself
has been known to borrow
books from our collection.
Must they do that every day?
People are saying there might
be a war with Russia soon.
Stalin's trying to block
access to West Berlin...
There's always another fucking war!
I'm so sorry.
You know, he didn't even
know what that word meant.
I actually called him a
fucking sadist once,
and he'd no idea what
I was talking about.
We had a good laugh about it afterwards.
You know, whenever you talk about him,
you nearly always mention
his fine sense of humor.
Do I?
Aye.
And his smile, and his hair.
It really is the most...
Was.
It really was the most
extraordinary mop of red
you'd ever seen.
- It's...
- You don't have to say it.
I know, he's dead.
Dead, and buried, and...
moldering in the ground
for the past two centuries.
I just want to know...
I just need to know if he really did
die on that battlefield.
He told you he would stand and die
with his men on that bloody moor.
Do you have any reason
to doubt his word?
No.
You have had
an extraordinary adventure, Claire.
Extraordinary.
One that few people could even imagine.
Treasure it.
Keep it safe and secure,
tucked away in some special
place in your heart,
but...
don't spend the rest of
your days chasing a ghost.
Not when there's a man,
a real flesh and blood living man,
who loves you still with all his heart.
Frank?
Claire.
Would you care to come in?
I thought we could talk.
This reminds me of that night at Mrs.
Baird's.
Sitting by the fire,
drinking good Scottish whiskey.
More candles, as I recall.
The power had gone out.
You remember.
Of course.
It was our last night together.
Yes.
Frank, I want to tell you
what happened to me after...
You... you don't have to.
I, I want you to know that.
Whatever happened, wherever you've been.
What really matters to me
is, is that you're back.
I don't really care about anything else.
So let me tell it at my own pace.
Save any questions you
have until the end.
Remember I went back to
Craigh na Dun that day
to look for a flower that
I'd seen near the stones.
I know how it must sound,
that I've gone mad.
It's quite the leap of faith.
But...
It is one that I am
prepared to make as well.
Don't patronize me, Frank.
It's insane, I know that.
It sounds like a... a fantasy
made of magic and fairy dust.
Are you trying to argue
me out of believing you?
I'm trying to get you to admit
that even as you stand there
trying to be supportive
and understanding,
that rational, academic brain of yours
is screaming out that your ex-wife
has either lost her mind
or has fabricated some wild tale to...
- to drive you away!
- "Ex-wife?"
I married another man.
And yet you are still
wearing our wedding ring.
Claire, I admit it is hard to
reconcile what you are saying
with anything resembling
logic, or even natural law.
But, Claire, I think we are beyond that.
Truly, all that matters
is that you're back.
You're back.
Frank, I was with another man
for two years.
And I loved him, deeply, as his wife.
A point you have made several times,
I do understand, Claire.
But I don't think you
understand my perspective,
what it was actually like
to have you just torn away like that.
I'm sorry, that must...
No, please.
You have said a great deal.
I only need a few minutes.
When you disappeared,
everyone wanted me to
believe that you had left
of your own volition with another man.
And for a time I wanted to
believe that, too, believe me.
So that I could fill...
the utter void that I felt
with rage...
with betrayal...
with hatred...
But I... I couldn't.
Because deep down I knew...
I knew that whatever had happened,
you did not choose to leave me,
that something had taken you from me,
and everything that you
have told me tonight
confirms at least that.
Now as for this...
this other man...
Jamie.
I will not say
that I understand your feelings for him.
How could I possibly?
But I can accept them.
I can accept that you...
that you did feel that way,
that you had this...
this experience with this man,
and that leaving him broke your heart.
I can accept it.
I don't think you understand...
Claire, I once told you
there was nothing you could say or do
to change how I felt about you.
I meant it then, and I mean it now.
I love you, Claire.
Unconditionally, no matter what.
And here, now, and in this time.
Darling, I... Jesus.
I'm, I am your husband,
and you're my wife.
We can still have a life together.
Please, Claire.
I'm pregnant.
Pregnant, what?
Claire, that's wonderful.
How is that... how is that...
No.
No...
It's Jamie's.
No.
I'm carrying another man's child, Frank.
You need to think about that,
and what that means.
For all of us.
Good morning, Mr. Randall.
You're up early.
Breakfast will be in about...
Forgive me, I apologize for the...
for all the damage.
I will, of course, make the full...
No, no, no, think nothing of it.
No, it was a... a lot of old junk
I should've put in the
dust bin years ago.
No, we need to focus
on what's important.
You say that... that Claire is...
is with child.
This, uh, other man, are
you certain he's dead?
Yes.
Her, um, her grief on that
account seemed genuine.
Do you want to raise a child?
Have, have you thought seriously
about having children?
Claire and I had tried to start a family
before she disappeared,
but, uh, without success.
I became concerned that
perhaps I was incapable.
Medically.
And I visited a doctor
in Oxford last year,
and his examination
confirmed that suspicion.
I'm sterile.
Oh, I'm... I'm sorry.
Well, first I, uh, I
reasoned with myself
that with my wife gone,
the question of my fertility was,
well, an academic one at best,
so I pushed the subject aside,
concentrated on my work.
When Claire told me
that she was pregnant,
I was...
I just...
my first feeling was...
was joy.
This flash of...
of just happiness.
It was almost hallucinatory
in its intensity... I just...
Because...
somehow, suddenly, in that moment, I...
I thought she meant
wewere having a child.
God.
Then I realized, of course...
Couldn't be mine.
Had to be his.
Listen to me now.
Other men have faced this...
have faced this situation.
I, I doubt that very much.
When Mary told Joseph
that she was with child,
and he couldn't be the father, he...
he... he...
he too was confronted
with a crisis of...
I am not Joseph! She is not Mary.
And I am fairly certain that the father
is not God Almighty.
He was a man, a man who fucked my wife.
Yes, Roger?
Please, may I go outside to play?
Of course, you may.
You keep your breeks out of the dirt,
or Mrs. Graham will be on the warpath.
Yes, father.
Forgive me.
No, no, no, he's fine. He's fine.
I, I doubt he heard very much.
I don't think I've ever
heard him call you father.
He's... he's taking to
doing it more of late.
Children accept the world
as it is presented to them.
He knows I'm not his father,
but that's how he sees me,
and... well, I've decided
to stop correcting him.
Please...
you're going to connect your
nephew to my situation.
The words "God's plan"
are about to escape your lips, I...
Well, at the risk of fulfilling
your worst expectations,
I will say this.
A child without a father,
and, and a man without a child
have been given this chance
to find one another.
And yes, I would call that
part of God's eternal plan.
What you choose to call it, Frank,
well, that's up to you.
Just like that?
We just pick up where we left off?
Are you sure about this, Frank?
Perhaps you should take
some time to think about...
I've had too much time to think.
Two years to contemplate the prospect
of a solitary existence.
I want us to be together.
Man and wife.
And child.
We start over.
I have been offered a post at Harvard.
I was going to turn it down.
Now I have a mind to take it.
To Boston.
Yes, the story of the...
"the lady taken by the fairies,"
as long as you're here, the
British press will flog it...
Please, Frank,
don't ever use the word "flog"
in my presence again,
is that understood?
Very well.
I also have conditions.
We will raise this child as our own.
Ours.
Yours and mine.
Raised in a lie.
No, with a father.
A living, breathing man.
Not the echo of a memory
that they can never catch.
Not a ghost.
Precisely.
You have other conditions?
Only one.
While I draw breath on this earth,
I cannot share you with another man.
No more research.
No more combing through the
libraries of the world,
hoping to find some reference to him
or to the life you once led.
You must let him go.
I know.
I promised him I would.
He made me promise
that I would let him go.
So I will.
I accept your conditions.
You have made me very happy,
and I hope, in time,
that I will make you happy, too.
Time to leave the past behind.
It's all right.
When you're ready.
Thank you.
One more step.
- To new beginnings.
- Aye.
I thought you were going
to knock people over,
trying to get off that gangway.
I couldn't take another moment on that
rolling, creaking, leaking tub.
So I guess a trip to Boston
is out of the question?
Not unless ye want to bury me at sea.
Well, there were times
I thought it would be the
merciful thing to do.
France.
Reeks of frogs,
just as I remember it.
I think you'll find
what you smell is fish,
and I doubt there's a
seaport in all the world
that smells any different.
I'll arrange for some
rooms for us somewhere.
Somewhere away from all this stink.
Sure.
Hey, hey, careful there!
That's not a sack of
grain yer tossing about!
A bed...
that doesna move.
Luxury.
What is it?
Sometimes I...
feel his touch.
Like he's here.
I'm here, I'm right here,
and I'm not going away.
You're a hard one to get
rid of, that's for sure.
I'm stubborn, just like my husband.
Hmm.
Now... let's talk about the future,
and how we're going to change it.
You're talking about
stopping the Jacobite rebellion?
Well, that is what we
agreed to, isn't it?
I thought we agreed to think about it?
If there's going to be a
war against the British,
should we not be trying
to find a way to win it
instead of stopping it?
Well, I don't know enough details
to tell you how to do that.
Well...
what... what do you know, exactly?
Just the general outlines of history.
I know that Bonnie Prince
Charlie comes to Scotland
and raises a Jacobite army.
At first they have several victories...
Well, that's a start, is it not?
Can we not build on that,
help them to keep winning?
I don't know the tactics.
I don't know the strategy.
I don't know where the armies were,
why they won, or how they lost.
All I know is that
eventually both sides end up
on Culloden Moor in April 1746,
and the Jacobites are wiped out.
And after that, the British
destroy the Highland culture
in retribution.
That is the sum total of
my knowledge of the war.
That's not a lot to go on, Sassenach.
But it starts now.
Here, with Charles in France.
I mean, we have to stop it here,
before the prince sails for Scotland.
We can infiltrate the Jacobite movement.
Get close to the key players.
Discover where they get
their money and their arms,
and find a way to disrupt their plans.
You certainly have high
opinion of what a...
crippled Highlander and a
pregnant English woman
can accomplish.
Since when were you not
up for a challenge?
Your cousin Jared lives in
Paris, he's a Jacobite.
He can vouch for us,
make some introductions.
What are you thinking?
I'm thinking it's not
a very honorable path
you're laying out for us.
It's not just lying to my cousin.
We'd be lying to everyone.
But you have to remember
what's at stake.
We're talking about tens
of thousands of lives,
and the future of Scotland itself.
Surely that's worth the price?
Even if that price is our souls?
That won't happen.
We won't let that happen.
We have to trust in this.
In this I do.
And in this I will.
I'll, uh, I'll write a letter to Jared
asking him for his help.
What?
What the hell are we
going to tell Murtagh?
So that's all you'll tell me, hmm?
Nothing more?
- We can't, I'm sorry.
- You must trust us.
I trust ye with my life,
ye ken that well.
But it seems to me ye
don't trust me to know
the true reason behind this...
this cloth of lies we're
about to wrap ourselves in,
like a plaid woven out
of guile and deception.
We've told you the reason,
to stop the Jacobite rising.
That is the purpose of the lie.
It's not the reason.
The rising is doomed to failure.
it must not happen.
Again, not the reason.
The true reason behind yer certainty
remains carefully hid.
And you're hiding it from me.
You're right.
We are keeping it hidden.
But believe me, if we could...
One day...
I will tell you the reason.
I vow to you.
I'll tell you everything
that has happened
and why.
At the proper time.
Aye.
That'll do.
And when will be "the proper time?"
You tell me, Sassenach.
You're the one from the future.
I admire your patriotism, to be sure.
But I am curious as to your
sudden change of heart.
Well, Jared, my heart has ever been
full of love for my country.
Aye.
But you miss my meaning.
We've known each other a long time.
You've lived in my house.
You've dined at my table.
You've lifted more than one
glass with me at establishments
too disreputable to mention
in front of your fair bride.
Dinna fash on her account.
She's a sturdy woman.
"Sturdy."
Why, Jamie, you do flatter me so.
Nevertheless, in all that time,
I never heard you once voice
even the slightest interest in politics.
In France, to be known as a Jacobite
is a badge of honor,
supporters of the true faith
against the heretic on the throne.
But we have enemies, to be sure.
Enemies that would delight
in watching us dance a jig
on the gallows back in England.
So while the cause has many friends,
only a few are called brother,
and they are the ones with
the fire of righteousness
burning in their hearts.
Tell me now, what is the
fire that burns within you?
Show him.
Courtesy of the British army.
Also a crippled hand
and several scars across
his mangled body.
Now, I ask you plainly,
does any man need further reason
to rise up against a king
that would allow such horrors
to be carried out in his name?
No.
The cause can only be
strengthened by your sword.
I'm sorry I doubted you, brother.
Will you help us then?
In what way?
What is it exactly that
you would wish me to do?
I want to meet the Jacobite
leaders face to face.
I want to hear their plans,
how they mean to carry them out.
Why should they meet with you?
A wanted man in his own country
now come to France with
a price on his head
and not much more than
the clothes on his back?
I should think the Stuarts
would value the support
of Laird Broch Tuarach
and the Fraser clan,
should they plan on
returning to Scotland
in the near future.
Perhaps.
I shall give it some thought.
But in the meantime,
I believe we can be of
help to one another.
I've been delaying a
trip to the West Indies
until I could find someone
competent and trustworthy enough
to run the wine business in my absence.
You have a fine head for
figures, as I recall?
Aye.
But I know nothing of the wine business,
beyond drinking, of course.
I've seen you drink. You will do fine.
And in return, I will give you
the run of my house in Paris,
and while I'm gone, a
share of the profits.
Say, twenty-five percent.
Thirty-five percent.
And your help.
Oh, you will do just fine.
Done.
While Jamie inspected
the shipment of port,
I went for a walk.
I was beginning to be susceptible
to bouts of morning sickness,
and while the air along the
docks wasn't exactly fresh,
it was better than the close confines
of our temporary lodgings.
Claire!
The captain tried to stop me
from seeing the sick crewman
because he knew the truth.
Claire!
Claire.
No, stay back.
Stay back, it's all right.
If this is what I think
it is, I can't get it.
Pus-filled
blisters, and high fever.
The diagnosis was obvious.
_
This will be trouble.
Le Comte St. Germain.
_
- _
These men must be quarantined.
We need to contact the local
medical authorities...
No, this is a matter best left
to the port authorities, Sassenach.
Jamie, I can't just...
Claire, trust me.
Claire!
_
Claire, we have to go.
There's nothing more you can do here.
_
Monsieur...
Senior Broch Tuarach...
_
I have done nothing more
than state the truth.
_
Make no mistake.
The Comte will not forget what happened.
You've made an enemy here today.
Another country, another enemy.
Life with you is certainly
never dull, Sassenach.
I shall endeavor to be
more dull, if that
would suit you better.
I wouldn't change you to save the world.
- sync and corrections by Caio -
- www.addic7ed.com -